Cushing’s Cases

Questions submitted from pet owners and answered by Dr. Steve Marsden on “Ask Dr. Steve DVM” Facebook Page.

Topic: Cushing's Disease



Case 1: IBS, Enlarged Heart, Fluid in Lungs, & Heart Murmur

Question: My dog is about to turn 15. She was recently diagnosed with Cushing’s and her vet put her on 20 mg of Vetoryl. She is currently about 13-14 pounds and it ended up being too high of a dosage. She got extremely ill and I took her off of it and she bounced back. The vet and I agreed to not put her back on it and I would like to try a holistic approach, but he doesn’t practice that approach so couldn’t give me advice.
She has IBS, an enlarged heart, a heart murmur, sludge in her gallbladder, and recently had fluid in her lungs. She takes Vetmedin, Lasix, Ursodiol, and Benazepril.

She’s an extremely picky eater and I make her homemade meals of things such as canned salmon, brown rice, cauliflower, green beans, eggs, and chickpeas for the most part.

Based on this information, I’m wondering what I can do for her holistically and safely to help with the Cushing’s. I have searched this group and #dogcushings and watched your video. I’m familiar with a lot of the options, but due to her ailments and medications want to make sure I am doing the right thing. Thank you so much!

Dr. Steve's Advice - Given the history of congestive heart failure, IBS, and gall bladder sludge, the first thing I would still try is a low carb meat-and-vegetable diet with Four Marvels added. Based on her response, we can modify as needed, but that is how I would start. Note that the diet change is VERY important. It sounds like there is a lot of starch in your homemade diet, which is problematic for dogs. At the most, all plant material should probably make up about 1/6 of what is in the dish, with the rest being meat. You could even just reformulate her diet first, and then let me know what the lingering problems or symptoms are after making that change. If her starch consumption is already scanty, and you're still nervous, let me know all the symptoms your dog is experiencing and when exactly they happen (and when they started), so I can see if there is anything more appropriate than Four Marvels. Alternatively, start with the dose on the label of the product (which is very low), ensure there are no issues, and if not, move up to giving the amount in the table at https://nphc.ca/using/dosage twice a day Hope that helps.
 

Case 2: Cushing's, Seizures, and Adrenal Tumor
 

Question: This is my sweet Roxa. She is 14 years old and she had a tough few months. She was recently diagnosed with cushing's disease and it is not confirmed which one it is (the test was inconclusive and no ultrasound was done). Due to the severity of her symptoms itis believed that she has an adrenal tumor.

She has started 10mg of vetoryl at the end of November and increased to 10mg twice a day for two weeks now. Her symptoms have not improved and I am mostly going by the excessive drinking and the potbelly. She is 41lbs and I don't believe the dosage is high enough to make a difference.

Roxa also had a seizure about a months ago. This was the first one she ever had and I started her on CBD oil right away. She had no more seizures and it sure seems like the CBD is helping her feel better overall.

A couple of weeks ago I also noticed that her back is all covered in a crust along her spine. She is loosing hair and it has gotten quite a bit worse in the last week. I believe it is a side effect of the steroids and calcium built up.

She had obe treatment of light therapy for it and is also on some anti-inflamatories (minocycline). I am just keeping her wounds clean and using a calendula cream on her. Do you suggest any other treatments for her?

I am also waiting for a tincture for her made out of gingko, milk thistle, dandelion, rehmannia, astragalus.

Do you recommend anything else for her on her back and in general for the cushing's? Thank you so much for looking at this.

Dr. Steve's Advice - it's my belief that most cases of Cushing's can be pretty easily and quickly cured.

You'll see that the first thing I recommend is the feeding of a real food diet that is focused on meat and vegetables. No large quantities of carbs like rice. No big quantities of fat. No kibble or canned food. Without making that change, nothing works particularly well, so the change is 'non negotiable'.

The cost of feeding that way may be significant, but probably pales in comparison to what you've spend on vet bills. I always tell people: "You're going to spend the money somewhere, either on food or at the vet. It's much cheaper and better overall to spend it on the food". Once you've got the dietary foundation for improvement in place, the next step is usually to introduce Four Marvels Combination. Kan Essentials makes a version which you can often find online in the US if your vet won't supply it. Alternatively, if you're in the US, you can contact Diana Hermann through the instructions she provides above, under Featured posts.

Those two steps - real food and Four Marvels - are enough to get most cases improving quickly. The first case I ever treated this way also had seizures, which resolved at the same time as the Cushing's. I would also expect your dog's skin complaints to improve at the same time and pace, which is usually quite rapid.

A few other comments. Severity of symptoms are unrelated to where the tumor is actually located - pituitary vs. adrenal. Most affected dogs don't actually have a tumor. Hopefully this helps you out!
 


Case 3: Cushing's and Stage 2 Kidney Failure

Question: Hello Dr Steve, my Cushing’s dog now has stage 2 Kidney failure. I’m stopping the Vetoryl / Trilostane since an increase she has these labs. Her hind limbs were trembling and very week a few days ago but her rear has been lagging for a few weeks now. She hasn’t had a solid stool in a long while more recently watery spell back to mush. Green mucus from vag. Always wants it wiped gets happy when I get a tissue or wipe. She’s Mobile just slower. More insecure. most Rehmannia￼ based formulas increase her indigestion and diarrhea. There maybe a heart thing too? Waiting on report. She is back to eating. She hasn’t vomited in days. It was just that morning /24 Hour and that was the day before these labs were taken. Basically I’d be very interested in an herb formula that can help her kidneys and her Cushing’s without causing diarrhea. I have no idea if that’s possible. ￼ dampness is her enemy. Everything gets worse when she takes in humid air if win￼d coming from the n/east, and there’s a slight chill. Wind /damp /cold (refusal to be outside) and switches but hot is no good either as a Frenchie never is. Getting ultrasound and sterile urinalysis Wednesday. Home cooked been that for most her life making adjustments for the kidney stuff and I have phos binder on board.(tumor egg size 9/22 right adrenal) I’d guess she has hypertension or close. PU PD and PP all up. Going through way more In house potty pads.

Dr. Steve's Advice - the weakening on Trilostane suggests Qi or Yang deficiency, which weakens the Spleen, aggravating Damp formation. The worsening on Rehmannia likewise suggests Damp.
Given the above, the GI signs, the possible protein-losing enteropathy that is going on, the azotemia, the liver enzyme elevation and the Cushing's, one formula I'd suggest is Wei Ling Tang. I use the Natural Path version, but Kan Essentials sells it in liquid and tablet form as Spleen Support Formula. I've seen it help all of the above. Hopefully that helps.



Case 4: Textbook Cushing's Disease

Question: I’ve been struggling since September 2020 with my dog Steele’s health. He’s a 10 year old male neutered German Shepherd Siberian Husky cross.

Noticed a big decrease of energy in him in September 2020 and it’s been a steady decline ever since. We’ve been in and out of the vet with blood work done and normal. He just had a slightly elevated liver enzyme’s but they weren’t concerned. It was suspected hypothyroidism. His coat
 
became very corse, he drinks bowls and bowls of water and urinates like a horse multiple times when we go out for washroom breaks.

He’s started to loose fur a lot and has been having issues with his skin over the last few months. We were just in for a big mass under one of his pressure sores that had filled with fluid and ruptured. The vet which wasn’t my regular said he was text book Cushing disease. Wondering your thoughts on him and I will probably move forward testing him for cushings to see if that’s the case.

Dr. Steve's Advice - that certainly does sound like Cushing's. If ALP was significantly elevated on his bloodwork, that would further corroborate it.
You can absolutely do further testing, but dogs can be highly symptomatic, yet test negative for years, before the condition is finally proven to be present. Vets can't really prescribe the drugs for Cushing's until that positive test, since they are quite toxic to a normal dog. Fortunately, you don't need to wait!

The main cause of Cushing's in at least 2/3 of cases appears to be a processed diet. Switching to a lower starch meat-and-vegetable diet often precipitates an immediate improvement, within just a couple of weeks. We also pair that with Four Marvels Combination, a formula available through your veterinarian from Natural Path (if they are interested in helping you) but also from Kan Essentials if they are not, via sites like Amazon in the US. The herbs and diet work together to normalize adrenal gland activity and eliminate excess secretion of cortisol, which is often not due to a pituitary tumor, but apparently to the consumption of high glycemic index diets.

Note, however, that even if it was a pituitary tumor, ample research shows Four Marvels can help, since it doesn't just act on body metabolism, but also on the adrenal glands. Hope this helps!






Case 5: Unusual Cushing's Case

Question: I have read through so many posts in #dogcushings but I haven’t found a similar case to mine.

My 12 year old Frenchie Cocoa was diagnosed with Cushings with the ACTH test and ultrasound showing a pituitary dependent. He has developed calcinosis cutis and lethargic most of the day , his eyes are constantly goopy and mucus is coming out of his nose as well. He seems to open his mouth to grasp for air when he’s inhaling. Some times he will be trembling too. He urinates frequently and drinks a large amount of water by putting his mouth into the bowl instead of lapping it up before. The bottom of his chin is dripping wet every time from dipping his muzzle into the water to drink the water which he didn’t do before.

He does not have any pot belly appearance nor increased appetite. He has become a very picky eater. Only eating cooked chicken breast. He has been losing weight consistently the last few months.

He started with vetoryl 20mg/ day for only a few days then decreased down to 10mg because
 
he was having trouble opening his mouth , wasn’t eating and his saliva would be brown. After having 10mg/day for a week while only eating chicken. He became very lethargic again. We decided to stop the vetoryl.
For a couple months now he only pooped 2-3x in this long of a span , then recently he had a few days of pooping only green mucus constantly through the day, every couple hours. The green mucus has stopped now but I haven’t seen him poop still.

After the doctor recommended to put him to sleep because the vetoryl wasn’t working. I found these wonderful supportive groups here including you and hoping we can find another way to improve his daily life.

I have started him on the adrenal gold therapy, four marvels and melatonin. I will be stopping the melatonin since I found a few posts saying that it does not help.

For the calcinosis, I have been using duox3 shampoo 1x weekly and daily foam. The dermatologist said I’ve been doing fine and said there was nothing we could do about healing it until the cushings was controlled.

I would like to start him on a raw diet but he’s too picky at his current stage. Uninterested in many foods I attempted to give him. He had been eating royal canin Hydrolozed protein for all of his life for allergies until his loss of appetite. Since then he only eats chicken breast.

Could you share your insight on which medicines I should add on to help with the symptoms I mentioned. Such as the lethargy, loss of appetite, and calcinosis.

Thank you so much for your consistent willingness to help and support us with our fur babies.

Dr. Steve's Advice - I think you're on the right track, but I would do two things. Four Marvels might be a bit strong for your dog right now and might suppress appetite further. I would switch to Spleen Support by Kan Essentials, which I have used to counter Cushing's in smaller, chillier, weaker dogs. It should help actively resolve that inflammation causing the mucous in the stools, help promote GI motility and stimulate appetite. There is a version called Dispel Damp and Nourish the Skin, also by Kan, that might make a start with that calcinosis cutis, especially if it is secondarily infected. Both of those formulas are often found on Amazon in the US

As for food, raw is not necessary. Just real, unprocessed food is enough. Diets don't have to be balanced for several weeks, since your dog will have stored ample levels of vitamins and minerals over the past few years. Chicken is fine for now, or whatever else might entice him. Try other things, too. Liver? Maybe some bacon? Few seem to be able to resist that last one!

I would also get thyroid supplementation going. Some of that lassitude is undoubtedly due to

hypothyroidism. It may improve as the above herbs kick in, but why not treat it in the interim so

he feels better and gets more of an appetite.

Hopefully these ideas help you out!



Case 6: Inconclusive Cushing's Test
 
Question:I have a 9 year old terrier, cocker spaniel and dachshund mix male dog. About 3 years ago we noticed some itching and scratching with a lot of paw licking. He had a pretty bad rash all over his body. We took him to our vet and he was prescribed Apoquel 16 mg 2x day. Two days after giving him this his symptoms multiplied. We took him back to the vet. They took him off of it. Since then he’s been visiting the vet often with symptoms such as bloating, itching, rashes all over his stomach, extreme dry nose, excessive panting, patches of hair missing with sores, multiple skin infections and no energy. I pushed for them to test him for cushings but his labs came back inconclusive.

HIs lab work has showed issues with his liver and they put him on milk thistle. He’s had several labs over the past 3 years. Always it’s high liver levels. Nothing else.

The latest is a large rash all over his stomach (Leto/chlorohex shampoo given and GenOne Topical Spray). Extreme stuffed and dry nose (animax ointment). An ear infection that’s damaged his eardrum (motazol given) and as of this week his eyes are draining a terrible liquid that’s mucus and I’m wiping alit with warm towel. He’s struggling to breathe and is just miserable. We are regulars at the vet but I’m frustrated. He’s dropped a lot of weight these past few weeks.

His dog food is purina pro plan for sensitive skin and stomach. I do share things like apples with him daily.

Anything you can think of that might help me help him I’d greatly appreciate.

He’s the middle dog. Rascal.

Dr. Steve's Advice - job one is to (at least for a couple of weeks) give him food that does not come from a factory. You can go to a boutique pet supply store and grab a commercial raw diet, a freeze dried diet, or a 'home cooked' refrigerated diet. These diets are the first things anybody should do if their dog is Cushingoid, whether or not the blood tests identify it, since development of the condition to the point that lab tests can pick it up takes a while.
Usually within even just a couple of weeks, the improvements are clear and comprehensive. You might not need to do anything more than that, but if you want, you can also add in Four Marvels from Kan Essentials. It's the go-to for Cushings. Either that, or if the only real lingering symptoms are nasal congestion and eye goop, you can use Three Seeds Combination instead from the same company. You can find these online usually at Amazon if your vet is unwilling to stock them for you.

The other possibility is Cessorex from Gold Standard Herbs. It's not quite as commonly the answer for Cushing's, but is needed for some cases. What brings it to mind for me is the worsening of skin symptoms on antibiotics. That can happen if they disrupted the microbiome, causing a leaky gut to worsen that, in turn, flares up any allergies, so keep Cessorex in mind. Particularly if the above diet change does NOT help your dog, Cessorex is likely to be your baby.
 


Case 7: Cushing and Some Gallbladder Problems
 

Question: Hello,

I have Male Pomeranian Dog which Today is 3 Years Old , and current weight is 5.8KG He is Unneutered ,

for the past 11 Months I have visited 8 different Vets to identify which disease he has Thyorid/Cushing or other .

This is the main symptoms he has :

-Increasing Hair loss in stomach , and both sides of body -Increasing Potty belly (bloated stomach ) -Excessive hunger

-small Skin problems

Tests have done:

ACTH, LDDST , X5 ULTRASOUNDS IN DIFFERENT RADILOGISTS , FT4 , T4 ,TSH , UPC ,

Urinalysis , UCCR etc..

Have Done x4 Ultrasounds

Short Story:

Currently he got treated with : Ursolite 100mg (1/2 per day) for his gallbladder , Wepatic (for liver)

After all the vets visited has came to conclusion with 3 Vets:

IMS Number 1:

Tested with him : FT4,T4,TSH,LDDST,ACTH, X2 ULTRASOUNDS

We haven’t confirmed 100% he has Cushing cause of “Fasle Positive results”

at the end he decided or we do LDDST again , or start treating with Trilostane 7.5mg twice a day. ( I didn’t understand if he meant 15mg total a day , or 7.5 total a day) Expert VETernian in my country:

After checking Previous results of lddst , acth ,

and did another Blood test told me he has “ AT CUSHING” (Iatrogenic Cushing's with secondary pathology of the liver)

-Gave me treatment of Ursolite 100mg (half tablet a day) , and wepatic for liver support AT first wanted to treat with ketoconazole , and recent visit gave me to treat with “Trailstone”tablets 10mg , twice a day ( 5mg morning , 5mg evening) IMS 2:

-Suspected its thyroid issue , treated my dog with thyroxine 0,1mg for 1 month , after FT4 test and more ultrasound , conclusion Cushing in adrenal, and some gallbladder problems

Along with this, an adrenal tumor in such a young dog is unusual (but not impossible) and you need to make sure that the finding is indeed significant. It may be necessary to consider surgical removal of the enlarged gland and/or drug treatment for the excessive secretion of cortisol (which will not affect the tumor itself but will help the clinical signs caused by cortisol secretion).

1.	Continue the treatment with thyroxine 0.1mg for another 1 month

2.	Continue Wepatic and Ursolite treatment without change.

3.	Adding Metronidazole (Metrogil) 250 mg, a quarter of a pill twice a day for a month.
 
4.	In a month, Come for another vist and repeat abdominal ultrasound to assess the rate of adrenal growth, repeat the ACTH test to assess the level of cortisol secretion and a decision on future treatment: surgical or conservative.
Final thoughts :

-Currently finished 30 days Wepatic tablets for liver + 30 days Ursolite 100mg for gallbladder which vet B gave him.

-still TAKING thyroxine 0.1mg for one month and a half ( which IMS2) GAVE HIM even after out ruling thyorid problem he told me to continue taking it until our next visit in 2 weeks.

1.	Vet B: want me continue give him Wepatic for more 60 days + start treatment of trilostane 5mgxtwice a day = 10mg per day.

2.	IMS2 : said don’t need to give Wepaitc , only continue with Thyorid pills + Metronidazole (Metrogil) 250 mg, a quarter of a pill twice a day for a month.

AND Then come for another ultrasound , and then decide on continued treatment

3.	IMS1 : 7.5MG Trailstone twice a day ( I didn’t understand if he meant 15mg totally a day or not).

Anyway each vet gives different opinion those are the only 3 which figured out my dog has cushing and not other disease,. And ive visited over 8 vets im losing my mind please help me out to sort out situation. And with which solution I can go.

if I go with VET B , is 10mg per day is a lot of 5.8kg dog?

Im attaching to google drive all results photos + the full story of all vets and results which visited Document if have time to read.

Dr. Steve's Advice - I'm not seeing results of the low dose dexamethasone suppression tests or ACTH stimulation tests. Those are what we use to diagnose Cushing's. I would say, however, that with the ALP as low as it is, and the adrenal glands basically a normal shape and size, that Cushing's is unlikely. The symptoms are suggestive of Cushing's, but if it's not showing on the labwork, then Trilostane doesn't seem advisable, especially in the absence of compelling laboratory evidence of Cushing's

Has your dog started to grow hair back on trilostane? If so, then maybe it's Cushing's after all. The dose for a whole day is about 10 to 15 mg. It looks like one vet wants to split the dose and the other just wants to give it once. Either is okay, but I wouldn't particularly expect great results given the rest of the findings.

As for having low thyroid, that much is clear. But it appears to be 'euthyroid sick syndrome' where your dog is lowering it's own thyroid deliberately because something else is wrong.

If this were my dog, I would go ahead and move him onto a real food meat-and-vegetable diet immediately, and probably start him on Four Marvels Combination (Si Miao San) if you can find it. If not, change the diet for now. Cushing's like symptoms often start to improve within just a week or two of a switch from kibble and canned to real food.
 






Case 8: Hypothyroidism and Cushing
 
Question: My boy is a boxer in 2020 he got imha was on lots of meds and 3 blood transfusions, this year he was diagnosed with hypothyroidism and Cushings. His fur has become thick. He seems to stay hot. He use to sleep with us but now would rather sleep on the cold hard floor. Is there a cooling bed that you recommend? He will be 9yo in Feb.

Dr. Steve's Advice - your dog will cool off once the underlying disease tendencies are addressed. The history of IMHA, become heated and Cushing's makes me wonder if your dog has a Shao Yang disharmony. A skilled veterinary acupuncturist could tell you. Meanwhile, a real food diet and "Halscion" by Gold Standard Herbs may help a lot. I use it to prevent IMHA relapse and normalize adrenal output. It helps dog sleep better and cool down at night Hope that helps!




Case 9: Atypical Cushing

Question: Is Happy wander an ok replacement for lignens and melatonin for a dog with atypical Cushing starring in their blood work or should those be used as well and if so does Khan have those? I have looked and can only find them in the product that may affect the liver.

Dr. Steve's Advice - they can all be used together if you like. I don't think Kan Essentials makes them, though, if you're looking for another vendor. I don't use them much myself, so I can't really help you there. Both should be pretty easy to find in stores or by Googling.

If you decide to forego them, I would expect the Happy Wanderer to work pretty well on its own.



Case 10: Cushing’s Positive - Large Adrenal Tumor

Question: Hi Dr Steve, My pup tested + for Cushing’s /5cm large adrenal tumor ,

last Dec nyc cooler weather and I had her on Si Miao San she had an episode stopped walking /peeing /eating and pooing. ER suspect IVDD got gabapentin and Acup and Physical therapy + Double p 2 but that never felt right hot paws, her bones were steaming I was changing her to Liu wei di huang wan but I listened to vet not myself. She Will not walk in rain (potty pad trained) wind has her dizzy and cold w/ wind or cold damp not good. last few months wasting more pronounced drinking too much peeing and more than just Frenchie hunger. 2020 and now uti w stones they passed the other day and Fly-biters (bad) (3 years no episodes but after fasted (acid bike when not fed) work up and long car ride windows open fall wind phlegm ? They returned worse than ever) her skin was very bad when adopted that’s mostly normal. Have her on Ophiopogon Formula/ mai men dong san and wei qi booster has paste like stool long
 
straining 1 x day. Always on home cooked low fat 75%meat 25%carbs mostly greens but recently more sweet potato for stool.(that’s cut now) stool is just the same as it’s fed in color. She was never much a farter but is now. Wasted , eye goop, yin def, 2 weeks ago ago pulses - rapid, right sided stringy, pot belly, grunty /sighing, worst gas, tired. I’m thinking Jue Yin syndrome ? Idk now has cold paws. Worried winter will take her …any thoughts. ZHi bai di huang wan? With something else . Processing fats have always been her weakness. Night time

&	night sight issues. We have not been out after dark since 2016 when I learned she’d rather hunt rats than pee. When hot on walk will reach for weeds if we stop to rest will lick the sidewalk or asphalt - Was on yi guan jian for a bit and back in the day long Dan xie gan tang for ears.

More fearful like last fall. Still wants to eat  . Cool seeking calm when not too warm. TYIA for any input.

Dr. Steve's Advice - it's hard for me to read your shorthand, and there is no dating on the lab work or ultrasound. I'm also not clear if your dog can walk or not after that disc disease incident. All that being said, the first thing that springs to mind for me is a combination of Bu Zhong Yi Qi Tang and Xiao Chai Hu Tang. You sound like you have someone who will dispense herbs to you, or maybe you can get them yourself. If so, I would use that duo.

BZYQT will help address the pasty stools and your sense of Jue Yin excess. It will also help

raise the Spleen Qi and Blood to where it can be dispersed by the upper burner to the exterior

body, to protect against invading Wind pathogens. Lastly, it will tonify the Spleen Qi to help

reverse the wasting you're seeing. XCHT will support BZYQT in its work, but will also help

harmonize the flow of Yang Qi in the body, to get rid of the PU/PD and polyphagia.

Biomedically speaking, when Cushing's occurs on a raw food diet, we have to treat the adrenal

like it is an actual tumor, which it sounds like it is. XCHT is an anti-cancer formula so it can help

with that. As well, if there is still time to get the adrenal removed (because the ultrasound is

recent), I'd explore that if the herbs don't work.

Hopefully this helps you out!



Case 11: Unconfirmed Type of Cushing Disease

Question: Hi Dr. Steve!

This is my sweet Roxa. She is 14 years old and she had a tough few months. She was recently diagnosed with cushing's disease and it is not confirmed which one it is (the test was inconclusive and no ultrasound was done). Due to the severity of her symptoms it is believed that she has an adrenal tumor.

She has started 10mg of vetoryl at the end of November and increased to 10mg twice a day for two weeks now. Her symptoms have not improved and I am mostly going by the excessive drinking and the potbelly. She is 41lbs and I don't believe the dosage is high enough to make a difference.
 
Roxa also had a seizure about a months ago. This was the first one she ever had and I started her on CBD oil right away. She had no more seizures and it sure seems like the CBD is helping her feel better overall.
A couple of weeks ago I also noticed that her back is all covered in a crust along her spine. She is loosing hair and it has gotten quite a bit worse in the last week. I believe it is a side effect of the steroids and calcium built up.

She had obe treatment of light therapy for it and is also on some anti-inflamatories (minocycline). I am just keeping her wounds clean and using a calendula cream on her. Do you suggest any other treatments for her?

I am also waiting for a tincture for her made out of gingko, milk thistle, dandelion, rehmannia, astragalus.

Do you recommend anything else for her on her back and in general for the cushing's? Thank you so much for looking at this.

Dr. Steve's Advice - it's my belief that most cases of Cushing's can be pretty easily and quickly cured. The first thing I recommend is the feeding of a real food diet that is focused on meat and vegetables. No large quantities of carbs like rice. No big quantities of fat. No kibble or canned food. Without making that change, nothing works particularly well, so the change is 'non negotiable'.
The cost of feeding that way may be significant, but probably pales in comparison to what you've spend on vet bills. I always tell people: "You're going to spend the money somewhere, either on food or at the vet. It's much cheaper and better overall to spend it on the food". Once you've got the dietary foundation for improvement in place, the next step is usually to introduce Four Marvels Combination. Kan Essentials makes a version which you can often find online in the US if your vet won't supply it. Alternatively, if you're in the US, you can contact Diana Hermann through the instructions she provides above, under Featured posts.

Those two steps - real food and Four Marvels - are enough to get most cases improving quickly. The first case I ever treated this way also had seizures, which resolved at the same time as the Cushing's. I would also expect your dog's skin complaints to improve at the same time and pace, which is usually quite rapid.

A few other comments. Severity of symptoms are unrelated to where the tumor is actually located - pituitary vs. adrenal. Most affected dogs don't actually have a tumor. Hopefully this helps you out.



Case 12: Pituitary Cushing's Disease and Liver Lump

Question: Good evening Dr Steve. I have a question About my 12.5 year old Jack russle cross who just had a ultrasound done Wednesday and they have found a lump 6cm big on the left side of her liver. The vet and the specialist who did the ultrasound suggested I get it removed. My question is... is she to old for surgery? The vet said there is a 0.5% chance a dog can not
 
make it at this age. I know a very slight chance but I am still terrified. They said if its left then it could rupture in side her if it gets bigger and she will bleed internally. She also has pirituary cushings disease which she has had for two years and is on 5mg trilistand for that twice daily. I have attached her ultrasound scans here. Any advice would be much appreciated

Dr. Steve's Advice - if your dog is otherwise strong (with no brain, heart or kidney complaints), and if the liver enzymes aren't too high, then there doesn't appear to be any contraindication to careful general anesthesia. Age itself is not a reason to not do a procedure. It's when the aging process produces a bunch of damage that you can then have problems. If your vet has thoroughly examined your dog and feels confident, and you trust him/her, then that's all you can really ask for in the way of assurances.



Case 13: Cushing, Weight loss and Muscle Wasting

Question: Hi Dr. Steve! Buckle up, this is a long one! My 13.5 Frenchie, Frank, was recently hospitalized for pneumonia. He had no noticeable symptoms except he stopped eating a drinking. He was treated in hospital for 3 days and released with antibiotics and anti-nausea meds. About a month prior to the pneumonia, he had an idiopathic vestibular event, which he’s mostly recovered from except for the head tilt and getting dizzy going down stairs. Approximately a year ago, he was diagnosed with Cushings; it’s well controlled with meds. While in hospital, he had extensive blood panels and ultrasound of major organs. Nothing was out of the ordinary or unexpected. The biggest issue we’ve been having is weight loss and muscle wasting. In his prime, he was typically 35-38lbs always trying to lose weight. Now, he’s 26lbs. With all of these factors, my team of vets believe there is something more going on in his brain, like a tumor or lesion. We’ve declined the ct scan, as he’s too old for surgery/chemo/radiation. We want him to have a very happy and comfortable end of life.

So, the question is what are the best supplements and supports to prolong the good he has left? We’ve heard about turkey tail, pepcid, Benadryl, and vitamin c. Another tricky piece is, he has become an exceedingly picky eater and is crafty with pills. So any creative suggestions for getting meds in would be greatly appreciated. These things no longer work: peanut butter, pill pockets, cheese, deli meat, pizza crust.

Here is a picture of Frank from today after he came home from the hospital.

Dr. Steve's Advice - I guess the first thing that needs to be considered is that the drugs for his Cushing's might be too much for him. The main sign that they need to be scaled back is loss of appetite and weakness. Even if ACTH stim tests show the adrenals are "right where the vets want them", this can be the case. I don't think there would be a hazard to abruptly discontinuing the drugs for a few days to a week. If you saw your dog's appetite and energy rally, you'd have your diagnosis. Most Cushing's cases can be cured without drugs, just by changing to a real food diet and adding in some herbs.
 
If you don't have an appetite for making that change without your veterinarian's say-so, a way to prove this might be the issue is to give Frank what Chinese medicine considers a Qi tonic, namely Liu Jun Zi Tang (aka Six Gentlemen and sold by Kan Veterinary Essentials as Six Gentlepets). If you don't have holistic vets on your team that can order from Natural Path, then you can probably find it online (https://tcvmpet.com/.../six-gentle-pets-liu-jun-zi-tang...). Dose according to the schedule at nphc.ca->using herbs->dosages. If you see an improvement in him, then we will know for sure the drugs are too much and that you should tackle the Cushing's another way.

That's what I would recommend for now. I personally feel the above is much more likely than a brain tumor. This may be a straightforward fix. Please let us know how it goes.



Case 14: Cushing and Increased Liver Values

Question: Hello Dr Steve. Me again ! My dog has Cushing’s Disease. I had been using PranaPets (pretty much all of them ). Last vet appt his liver values increased even more. I have been trying different foods for him. Home made, then used Littke Hunter which is too expensive for such a small bag. Then Honest Kitchen dehydrated , then to Maeve which is totally frozen raw. I also feed my Chihuahua the same, but I believe he may have gotten pancreatitis from it? Not sure too sure, but now back to honest kitchen fish & oats. I then added Denamarin. I will go to vets to check his liver values again in a month or so. With the pranapets (now - CBD , lignans & melatonin) and Denamarin, I saw this below. Can this also be given? I don’t want to overdue it with supplements if it may be too much Thank you


Dr. Steve's Advice - there would be no problem using "Halscion" in your dog with Cushing's. It's a first choice for those that haven't responded to diet change, which appears to be the case for your dog. It may help bring down those liver enzymes, too. It's definitely worth a try and compatible with the other supplements you specified.



Case 15: Pituitary Cushing

Question: Hi Dr. Steve! Can a Cushing's dog be given Lumbrex? She is a 10 year old boxer with pituitary Cushing's (with a macroadenoma) and had SRT done over 2 years ago. She also has very bad arthritis and has been whimpering more recently. We have been giving gabapentin 100mg 2x a day and know we can increase that but I'd prefer to give less drugs, not more. Her Cushing's is controlled with vetoryl but we only give 10mg every few days. We also give CBD
 
10:1 with THC as needed for pain. I was on the Gold Standard website ordering Cessorex and saw the Lumbrex and thought it might help. Any recommendations are appreciated! I hope you have a fabulous 2023!

Dr. Steve's Advice - If your dog has actual arthritis in the hips or knees, I'd wonder about Gold Standard Herbs' Voltrex as a better fit. If the joints are severely puffy and swollen at all, such as in polyarthritis, then I'd wonder about a Kan Essentials product called Free the Sinews. If you meant the arthritis was in her back, not her legs, then Lumbrex is a good fit if both legs are somewhat equally affected and she is primarily weak and not so much lame. If the response to Gabapentin has been dramatic, that is another reason to try Lumbrex.

Some people just use Voltrex and Lumbrex together to hedge their bets! Hope that helps!



Case 16: Early Stage - Cushing

Question: My Buster was just diagnosed, on May 22nd, for Cushings.

He's in the early stage, I think!

Because, although he drinks alot of water, he's not running out to pee  countless times a day.

He's fed 1c of food, freeze dried raw, 1/2-3/4 in the am n the rest b4 bed.

He does have that hanging belly n pants a lot.

But he's restless!

He moves all over the house at night.

He'll go from the bathroom, the floor is cool, to his box in the dining area, to any of his 3 other pillows.

His Dr Vet put him on Vetroyl, which I bought, but I'd rather not start him on that.

Looking for natural helps, Thank you.

Dr. Steve's Advice - get a hold of some Four Marvels from Kan Essentials. It is often available online at Amazon in the US. Dose according to the guidelines at https://nphc.ca/using/dosage. In tandem with a real food diet, it will produce benefits within a couple of weeks in most dogs.

Note that a real food diet is superior to freeze dried. You can make your own, or feed a commercially cooked or raw diet from the store. Improvements will then be even more rapid Hope that helps.



Case 17: Suspected Cushing with No Tumor
 
Question: Hi Dr Steve!

Our dog, Ginger, is suspected of Cushings due to an ultrasound done yesterday to check her belly to see why her liver #’s are elevated. The vet said no tumors but likely Cushings. She us drinking a lot of water and just started panting whenever we’re outside. It is warm spring weather, but this is new. She is about 11 y/o. I watched ur video and I have inquired with Nejolla Korris about what food Peanut was on. She advised Instinct Raw and vitamins. I will be switching from Instinct kibble to raw. I would like to start her on Four Marvels too. Can u suggest vitamins I can add to her raw diet going forward? Thank u!


Dr. Steve's Advice - it may not be necessary to add vitamins to the raw food. Instinct has veterinary nutritionists on their board, so it should be adequate.

The Four Marvels and real food diet are a potent combination. Here's hoping you see the same improvements as Peanut!



Case 18: Cushing with High Level Liver Enzymes and Low T4

Question: Oakley 12 yo retriever mix with diagnosed cushings. Has muscle loss. Food is honest kitchen dehydrated food started about 20 days ago. Was giving 4 marvels switched to "Halscion" and Lumbrex from gold standard herbs. Diagnosed with abcess tooth( needs surgery) this is why the blood work. Was diagnosed with gastroenteritis 5 days before abcess tooth. Is there anything I can do for his high level of liver enzymes and his low t4 or anything else you can see that could be helpful. Vet wants to do an ultrasound before surgery to make sure nothing else is going on with gall bladder or liver.

Dr. Steve's Advice - Four Marvels may still be a good idea if you only just got around to changing the diet. You may have switched off it, thinking it wasn't working, but if you don't change the diet in a Cushing's animal, Four Marvels may not resolve the symptoms satisfactorily. In fact, even Honest Kitchen may be too processed to see results. A raw or real food diet (whether commercially cooked or one you make yourself) will likely yield faster results. We have to assume the ALP and GGT elevations stem from the Cushing's, so hopefully your current diet change will be enough to help them head back downwards.

As for the thyroid, please get a TSH test done. If it's high, then your dog is hypothyroid and should be treated with thyroxine or a glandular extract that has not had its thyroid hormone content removed. If it's not high, then your dog is deliberately slowing down its thyroid hormone production to slow the disease process down, and we should probably respect that, by focusing on curing the Cushing's instead

Let us know what the ultrasound shows, but a real food diet and potentially a return to Four Marvels might be enough to get the job done.
 


Case 19

Question: I have a 15+ yo MaltiTsu with Cushings and chronic pancreatitis. About 2 months ago he managed to eat a dead bird and developed diarrhea. He was treated with Metranidazole, cerenia, and a probiotic. After about 7 days things were better for a couple of weeks. After this episode he developed extremely bad gas, the kind that clears the house. Then he developed diarrhea again along with the gas. Vet is only willing to give a probiotic again. We have done this with little change in diarrhea, and no change in gas. Any advice on something we can give him, we are all pretty miserable.

Dr. Steve's Advice - Sorry to hear of your little man's intestinal woes! If his Cushing's was confirmed with a ACTH stimulation test (or equivalent) and he still has a lot of Cushing's symptoms (e.g., excessive thirst, urination, appetite, and panting), a formula called Four Marvels Combination (Si Miao San) can improve his Cushing's as well as colitis. It is kind of like a herbal metronidazole and is available through vets from Natural Path and probably online as Kan Veterinary Essentials' Four Marvels. If you get the Kan version, look up the dose at nphc.ca->using herbs->dosages so you can be sure you're giving enough

If he doesn't really have a lot of Cushing's symptoms, a formula that is designed to resolve pancreatitis, help restore normal gut flora, and address colitis is Adoptrex .Use it along with a probiotic and you should see resolution of the problem. Hopefully this helps you out!



Case 20

Question: Hi Dr. Steve. I'm another Planet Paws listener who was blown away by your interview on Sunday.

I have an 11 year-old Miki who has Cushing's Disease from an inoperable tumor (which the oncologist believes to be benign) on her right adrenal gland. She is on 20 mg of Vetoryl a day but her symptoms have not all resolved. She is still urinating more than normal and she is looking for food all the time. Her pot belly has disappeared and she has dropped some weight. She has another tumor on her spleen which they believe is also benign. She has had three ultrasounds and so far the tumors don't appear to be growing.

My traditional vet spoke with an endocrinologist at Michigan State Vet College who said to increase the Vetoryl to 30 mg a day because he thinks the mass on her adrenal gland is probably now growing.
 
What should I be doing to support her system as we try to keep her symptoms from worsening? She is still her sweet self and loves life. I want to keep her that way as long as possible. I was crushed to find out that she had these tumors. I later found out that another one of my dogs has similar growths. They are fed a dehydrated raw diet (Small Batch) and I've stopped giving them flea and tick and heartworm preventative. I'm also not continuing with vaccines.

Dr. Steve's Advice - I'm glad there has been some improvement anyway.

It appears some of these adrenal tumors, even when they only exist on one side, are just overactive normal glands. What drives them are calories that are too easily assimilated and too dense. Your veterinarian won't likely have heard of this as a cause of Cushing's, but it is true for most cases. That means the condition can be cured with a low caloric density diet.

Something else that helps besides a raw or home cooked low carb diet is a Chinese herbal formula called Si Miao San (Four Marvels Combination). It's quite bitter but dogs happily eat it mixed into the real food diet if they have the typical strong appetite of a Cushing's patient. Otherwise, shake it up with some broth. The formula backs up the metabolic effects of the raw diet and has several actions on Cushing's as well. You can find it online usually, made by Kan Veterinary Essentials. Go to https://nphc.ca/using/dosage to find out how much to give of whatever version you buy

Hope that helps! If it doesn't don't despair. There are other options. But it usually works.



Case 21

Question: I left my dog in the garden today and got home to find him freaking out, panting like crazy and bloodshot eyes. I discovered he’d attacked a bobtail lizard. The vet has checked him over and says he is ok and they’re not poisonous. The thing I’m worried about is he has cushings disease and the amount of adrenaline he must have released is huge! Is there anything I can do to counteract the amount of stress he’s just put his poor adrenals under??!

Dr. Steve's Advice - if you're not using herbs yet to address the Cushing's, maybe at least try Halscion by Gold Standard Herbs. It really is impressive the way it subdues excessive adrenal gland secretions that drive over-the-top stress responses and anxiety attacks. I use it for malignant adrenal gland tumors, so it may well help benign ones, too. It's also my go-to for heat stroke in dogs. All in all then, it may be a great choice for your dog.


Case 22
 
Question: Hi Dr.Steve, back from July I have previously posted about my 8 yrs old neutered Morkie who has questionable Cushing symptoms and he went on developing more such as big belly, drinking lot more water, panting easily, with same skin issue and slight thinning, etc. His elevated ALP went even higher to over 1000 and Ucc(urine cortisol level) increase to over 115, Urine protein ratio also abnormal. He has been on a Freeze dried raw commercial diet for last 5 years with many supplementing products formulted by Dr. Karen Becker. We believe it is the early desexing procedure that contributes to his cushing development. very sad but unfortunately we cannot reverse in time for this mistake  

Yesterday I have just started him on Four Mavels tablet (half tablet BID) - is that the optimal dose for him? (he is 14ib) (Also is the Liquid Four marvel same formula as the tablet form?) He was also taking Cessorex once a day as well, along with Phosphatidyl serine, melatonin, Myo-inositol, tyrosine, etc (learning from Dr. Becker webinar) Would like to hopefully get more advices from you on what more we can do to help and hopefully reverse his condition? with the goal he can regain his health again, thank you so much again for your kindness and time!!

Dr. Steve's Advice - The first step is to get full dosing with Four Marvels in place using either tablet or liquid. Liquid might be easier to assimilate than tablets. I dose according to the guidelines at https://nphc.ca/using/dosage. I'd go with the dose for a 20 lb dog rather than 10 lbs. Give that dose from the table for the product you decide to use twice daily Follow up in a couple of weeks and see if his ALP has budged.


Case 23

Question: Good morning!  I have a 10 year old 37lb puggle with Cushing’s (not sure if it’s ardrenal or pituitary) and diabetes. My biggest question is: can I help lower or control the cortisol levels homeopathically w/o using Vetoryl, Anipryl, or Lysodren? I know I HAVE to use insulin for his diabetes but if I can treat the Cushing’s homeopathically, we’d prefer that.

Also, his diabetes was just diagnosed last week & he’s on 8 units of Vetsulin & continually in the 400s for sugar.   Should we increase his Vetsulin too, if so, by how much?   Please help our puppers if you can.  Thank you kindly!

Dr. Steve's Advice - Changing to a real food diet will not only help the Cushing's, but will increase insulin sensitivity, allowing insulin to work better in your dog.

Keep tabs on blood glucose as you make the diet switch and add in the Four Marvels formula (discussed in those posts). It will likely drop and you may end up need to lower the insulin dose in a couple of weeks.

Meanwhile, consult your veterinarian about the insulin dose that he should be on now, given his latest labs.

Here's hoping your dog does super well!
 

Case 24

Question: Hi Dr. Steve,

I’m hoping you can give me some advice on my 12 yr old, male dog, Teddy. He is currently being worked up for a couple different diagnoses and I’m hoping to optimize whatever I can.

1.	He has been having clinical symptoms of Cushing’s like increased thirst, urination and panting, but he has always been food driven so it’s hard to tell if that is related or not. I started him on melatonin & ligands, which seemed to help some of his symptoms. I’m working on getting copies of his labs, but he had a mildly elevated ALP and his LDDS results were ~15 (baseline), 1.5 (4 hrs post), 1.5 (8 hrs post). I did not want to start him on Vetoryl, like his original vet recommended, and his new vet agreed to monitor off it for now. I started him on Four Marvels and Dr. Harvey’s food.

2.	He has been coughing but the etiology is unclear. He was diagnosed with a collapsing trachea and his recent heart US showed stage B1 heart dz with some mitral valve regurgitation. He also suffers from allergies, so the vet is not sure if the cough is from allergies/bronchitis vs cardiac vs collapsing trachea. She is wanting to start him on Cytopoint injections and give him steroids, but is hesitant due to his “borderline” Cushing’s. Do you have any recommendations to help slow progression of heart disease and/or support his trachea and immune system to help alleviate his cough?

Thank you in advance and thank you for what you are doing for the public and their pets.

Dr. Steve's Advice - Hi there! The cortisol drops so low (relative to baseline) and stays there for so long that Cushing's seems less likely. If that is the case, then the Four Marvels is less likely to work, but is okay to continue, if you think you've seen benefits
Another Cushing's 'look alike' in Chinese medicine is Shao Yang disharmony, and it is a chief cause as well of collapsing trachea, chronic cough, allergies and even heart disease, particularly when remodeling has occurred (which is not in your case yet). Essentially, Shao Yang disharmony means the body has problems moving Yang energy around the body. If Yang (Heat) gets stuck in a particular location, you see signs you would expect from that Heat. If it gets stuck in the stomach and GI tract, you see hunger and thirst. Sometimes IBD tendencies. If Yang is stuck in the interior, it's not allowed to go to the dorsum. Unfortunately, that means it can't enter the so-called Tai Yang channels (or Bladder channels) which conduct Heat to the Kidneys and Bladder organ. If the kidneys don't get enough Heat, they don't concentrate urine, since that whole process was believed to be somewhat like a pot of urine on the stove, where you boil it to steam off (and collect) pure water vapor, then pee out the rest. If there's no boiling, there is a higher quantity of dilute urine discharged. Presto, then, you have your polydipsic, polyphagic, polyuric dog that reminds us all of Cushing's.

Since your dog has allergies and heart issues as well as the cough, and since liver enzymes aren't too high, I would try treating your dog with Cessorex from Gold Standard Herbs. It has the Minor Bupleurum core famous for resolving Shao Yang disharmony by venting Yang. That
 
should take care of the Cushing's symptoms. It also moderates the systemic immune system to help address allergies. It is an anti-tussive and relaxes bronchospasm, making it effective for collapsing trachea. Lastly, it contains herbs which help interfere with heart muscle dilation over time in response to cardiac complaints. It also boosts peripheral circulation, taking some of the burden off the heart valves. All in all, it's a good fit, so I would expect some improvements in your dog.

As always, strive for a real food diet consisting of a solid 1/6 by volume/wt of whole plant food material (vegetables, beans, fruit, cooked whole grain, etc.) Add in a probiotic (Lactobacillus and/or Bacteroides) to make use of those plant materials while regulating your dog's immune system.


Case 25

Question: Hello Dr. Steve, thank you for accepting me into this group. I have an almost 15 year old Bichon Friese Poodle cross who was diagnosed with Cushings this past Spring. She was on vetoryl for a few months then we had to stop as her cortisol got too low. She’s been off it for over a month now and her symptoms have returned in full. We are now considering trying a holistic route such as you recommend, like diet changes and four marvels. I have been told by various pet owners and professionals that vetoryl is the only treatment that will lower the cortisol level. Could you tell me this is true or not? I’m concerned about holistic treatment possibly only helping to relieve my dog of her symptoms, but not lowering her cortisol and therefore leaving her vulnerable to other types of medical problems associated with too high a level of cortisol. Any thoughts you could share on this topic would be appreciated. Thank you.

Dr. Steve's Advice - it's not possible for herbal formulas to suppress symptoms. Only large quantities of a single molecule can overwhelm the body and force it to react (or suppress a symptom). That means a drug.
The diet and herbs work because they are fixing the problem. If your dog's symptoms improve, it's because the diet and the herbs are simply restoring normal physiological responses in your dog, and not just overriding a single pathway like the drugs do. If your dog is among the majority that respond, they are often cured of the condition as long as you continue the diet, and herbs only as needed.

Meanwhile, it's the DRUG that relieves your dog of symptoms without curing the condition. It's very ironic that the people who have been criticizing you can't see that is the case.
 


Case 26
 

Question: Hello Dr Steve. Thank you so very much for the add. My 20 lb, 9-10 yr old Pomeranian was just diagnosed with Cushing’s Disease 2 weeks ago. Prior to this , the vet and I had a suspicion that he did have it. I gave him melatonin, Lignans and adrenal supplement for 2 months with no improvement what so ever. I complained to my vet of his panting and leg weakness and gaining wgt for 3 yrs … no vet suggested Cushing’s test until just recently . (Which has upset me for he could have been treated 3 yrs ago!). He has a hard time getting up , very anxious/nervous, the thirst & hunger. He also had hypothyroidism which he is on meds for and last blood test he was in a good leve for thyroid . I’ve read that a home cooked diet is the best . I’ve read holistic supplements are good as well, I just don’t know where to start but I just ordered Prana Pets Cushing’s Crush supplements . I’m on hold at this moment with an internal med vet to see if I can get an appt but, they will probably suggest Trilostane as my reg vet has?

***	UPDATE***. I picked up meds at vet yesterday for I feel I really need to start him on something. I asked if I could get 5mg of Trilostane twice a day but vet gave me 10 mg capsule once per day . I gave it to him at 5 pm EST. Not sure how quick this works but his panting seemed better. A lot of people are telling me I should still do 5mg bid , but how can I Make my vet do that? She said 10 my once a day .

Please help . Where do I start to make him feel better. It breaks me in two to see him struggle so much . Thank you

Dr. Steve's Advice - If you're not deep into trilostane yet, try the diet and Four Marvels I recommend there, as improvements are often rapid, eliminating any need for the drug. If you wish to use the drug, no problem. Use the herbs and diet anyway. In that instance, trilostane tends to have a weakening effect on dogs which you need to be alert to, so you can start gradually withdrawing it as the herbs and diet eradicate any lingering symptoms. Whatever you do, don't fall into the logical trap of thinking trilostane is a complete and magical cure. Herbs and diet are the only way of pulling that off, so they are the superior treatments, and thus the first ones I advise owners to try.



Case 27

Question: My 11 year old male chihuahua was recently diagnosed with Cushing's disease, and started on Vetoryl, 5 mg in the am and 5 mg in the pm. He weighs 8 lbs. (Dosage was increased to 10 mg am and 5 mg pm based on the 30 day test where he did not suppress). He is now exhibiting signs of masticatory muscle myositis (awaiting the 2M test results), but he is currently unable to open his jaw fully, he was sedated to do an exploratory, without success - his jaw would not release. I am awaiting a referral to an Internal Med Vet and also have an appointment with a Holistic Vet at the end of this month. I am growing increasingly concerned because his head and jaw are wasting. Is there anything I can do for him in the interim? He is still able to eat and drink, but with much difficulty. So grateful for your thoughts / suggestions.
 

Dr. Steve's Advice - There are a lot of potential treatments for your dog. When there are this many, it's crucial you have a vet to help you out with them, so you don't waste time on ones that don't work, and get some expert advice for what is most likely to work. I can offer a few ideas while you're waiting.

First, Cushing's is a dietary disease for the most part. A real food diet is essential for reversing it and will do so in about 70% of dogs. It's bizarre that your dog went on to develop masticatory myositis. That means your dog has immune-mediated disease tendencies, which means they might respond best to a "Shao Yang" approach to the Cushing's, which means Halscion by Gold Standard Herbs might be the best bet. It works in part by tempering adrenal output where it is excessive but has Minor Bupleurum at its core, which addresses dysbiosis and excess immune stimulation.

To target the myositis a bit more, add in Cool the Blood from Kan Essentials, or Qing Ying Tang by Natural Path if your dog has it. Later on, once the acuteness of everything has passed and the Cushing's is finally improving, consider Liver Support by Kan Essentials (or Bu Gan Tang by Natural Path from your vet) to help soften up the jaw muscles and alleviate spasm. Those are just some ideas to get you and your holistic vet started. The problems are solvable. That's the main thing to take away from this discussion.




Case 28

Question: Hi Dr. Steve!

Thank you so much for offering advice on this page.

I posted before about my cushing's dog Roxa. She also had really bad calcinosis cutis. She is now also on two blood pressure meds and clopidrogel as she had a bloodclot.

Last time I posted you suggested Four Marvels for my pup and a real food diet. I started Four Marvel about 6 weeks ago now and have seen no change in her from that. She still drinks excessively. I didn't have to make many adjustments to her diet since she has been on a raw fed diet with fresh veggies for years.

I saw in a different post about cushing's that you said Four Marvels would only help if the cushing's is diet incduced. Do you suggest I try a different product at this point?

Also I was wonderinf if you would have another suggestion for my dog. She is showing signs of a small stroke with the left side of her lip hanging. She gets the left top lip caught on her K9 at times and has a pretty deep wound from it by now. I don't know how to prevent her from biting on it?

She is on Vitamin B and St. John's Worth and has shown quite an improvement but not good enough to keep the lip away from her teeth.

Thank you for taking the time to read my post.
 
Dr. Steve's Advice - the dogs that don't respond to diet change and Four Marvels are a challenge. Thank goodness they are the minority of cases. I'm pretty certain those 'non-responders' are all Shao Yang disharmony dogs from a Chinese medical point of view, but exactly which variant of Minor Bupleurum is needed to resolve them is unclear. Sometimes, just Minor Bupleurum alone works. Other times not.
I would suggest trying Halscion from Gold Standard Herbs for your dog since it quells excess adrenal responses, can slake excess thirst, and also helps in cases of nerve inflammation and damage. I'd maybe give that a try and let us know what happens!



Case 29

Question: Thank you Dr. Steve for all that you do .

I have a 13 year old male Brussels Griffon who has recently been exhibiting symptoms of Cushing’s along with the urinalysis test of high levels ( 33 ) of Cortisol . He has another test coming up but I’ve already chosen the Homeopathic road for treatment . I started him on HMR Lignans / Melatonin at night ( he’s 9.5 lbs ) . I have ordered Four Marvels Si Miao San and he’s been already taking Ellevet cbd chews . His blood work shows some kidney issues so I started him on lightly cooked low phosphorus My Perfect Pet . What are your thoughts about what I have chosen and should I add anything else ?


Dr. Steve's Advice -as long as the diet you've chosen isn't too fatty or carb rich, then the Cushing's in all probability will respond well to what you're doing, even in the first few weeks of getting all that in place. Let us know if that is not the case.



Case 30

Question: Hi Dr. Steve, I wrote to you couple weeks ago about my German wire hair pointer Clover she has anal gland carcinoma, and was diagnosed with Cushing’s. ￼ since my initial post, I have put her on fresh food diet, I am giving her harmonize the Qi, dispel stasis in the Middle Palace, Sublime Joint formula and four marvels. I have stopped the Vetoryl. She is week in her hind end as well not sure if it is the cancer or the cushings disease. Is there anything else you would suggest or is the all good for now. She does have arthritis in her front “ankles” lol thank you!
 
Dr. Steve's Advice - I think you said your dog was on Vetoryl. If her Cushing's symptoms have improved since you started the herbs and changed the diet, then it may be the Vetoryl making her weak. If so, you could see if reducing the dose (e.g., cutting it in half) helps her feel stronger while still leaving the Cushing's improved. As for the anal gland adenocarcinoma, it's unlikely to be causing the weakness unless her condition is very advanced (e.g., with kidney failure and hypercalcemia).

If she has had knee or hip problems in the past, then you could use Voltrex instead of Harmonize the Qi, to better address joint pain while having an even better anti-cancer effect.



Case 31

Question: Can't thank you enough for any help - at a loss with Susie - Shih tzu/Bichon - Diabetes/Pituitary dependant Cushing's. 14 years, 13.8 lbs ( has lost 2 lbs) 10 units Vetsulin X2 daily ! Homecook/Balance It Vites/Homeopathics/Herbals + PhosphatidylSerine. Have tried Melatonin and Lignans however, I read not good for Diabetics. She does have some Zentonil that I can put her back on. Can't regulate the BG ( runs 20's ) I guess because Cushing's not controlled? She can't tolerate Vetoryl. In watching your video - looks like Commercial Raw diet + Si Miao San 4 Herb may work?

Dr. Steve's Advice - yes, the Cushing's is likely driving the out of control diabetes. What you're considering is the standard approach I take. I notice most Balance IT diets have a lot of carbs in them. If yours does, too, then it will be getting in the way of adequately controlling the DM and counteracting the Cushing's.


Case 32

Question: Baxter (13 y/o silky) has cushings (diagnosed March 2023). Started Vetoryl 3-28-2023. He was lethargic and didn’t feel good on this med. So I started researching. 7-03-2023 - Started the prana killer combo, melatonin and lignans, and nervous system support. Then I found you.

7-20-2023 - started kan marvels and Steve’s real food.

He had all the symptoms. Only symptom he has now is his weight gain of 4 lbs. he’s 18 lbs now. Pants a little when he’s outside. And he started again last week begging for food but only 30 min before time to eat instead of all day. And his belly is still large. My questions are:
 
1.	Can he take both combo and kan marvels or just the kan marvels.

2.	Will he lose his weight and his belly return as before?

3.	Do I need to give him anything else ?

4.	Sorry this is so long. Thank you so much for doing this for us. Cindy stephens

Dr. Steve's Advice - I don't particularly agree with the design of the Prana products for Cushing's, but some owners swear they are all that worked for their dog. If you saw a big improvement on them, then continue them.
I'm going to suggest, though, as someone who has treated and researched Cushing's for thirty years that cases are more likely to respond to the Four Marvels approach than the Prana approach. If you only began to see significant improvements once you started Four Marvels approach ten days ago, then your dog likely only needs those two interventions - Four Marvels and a real food meat-based diet - to address the problem.

If you're just not sure what is helping, or both seem equally helpful, then they are safe to use together.

You're only ten days in, so it's early days on the Four Marvels approach. I do anticipate dogs losing the belly if they seem clinically better even in just the first two weeks. If that's happening, they don't need anything else, at least for the next many months.



Case 33

Question: We are in the first week of testing and confirmed Cushing’s Disease for our 7.5 yo lab/hound mix. Currently figuring out which internal meds and other therapies to try while we also treat her severe skin wounds as a factor of this illness. Any direction or ideas are welcome!

Her Alc Phos was very high, which combined with skin sores, excessive drinking and appetite, diarrhea, and then an ultrasound by a board certified vet all pointing to Cushing’s. LDDST showed high baseline cortisol then at 4 hrs a slight reduction. No change at 8 hours

Dr. Steve's Advice - for the first two things I would try in your dog's case: Four Marvels Combination and a real food diet.

It sounds like your vet may be holistic, in which case she can source Four Marvels for you (from Kan Essentials or from Natural Path as Si Miao San). If they don't carry herbs on their shelves, contact Aleksandra Topic and obtain the Kan Essentials version from her.

As for diet, any balanced cooked or raw real food diet is fair game here for working with the herbs to begin the process of normalizing cortisol levels and adrenal gland function while also healing those sores.

Let us know how it goes. If it doesn't work, circle back and we can try to figure out something else. Most animals (maybe 70% at least) respond to just those two initiatives.
 


Case 34

Question: My dog was diagnosed with cushings an year ago, she has been doing great with the natural items. This year she has low thryoid and high cholestrol...anything I can give her to help? We have just switch to an senior food formula she is 9.5...any suggestions

Dr. Steve's Advice - real food diets are essential in these cases. It will likely lower cholesterol and may improve the thyroid. I don't see that happening on senior kibble diets.



Case 35

Question: Hi Dr Steve,

Thank you for you time and generosity. My dog has many health issues and her bloodwork is indicating Cushing’s disease. My question is this, can Four Marvels be given in conjunction with Cessorex and Halscion? She is 13.5 years old, raw fed her entire life, no chemicals have aver been used on her, only puppy vaccines have been given to her. . I am not putting her through the Cushing’s test, she has severe heart issues and I am not submitting her to the stress of that test. I am trying to be proactive naturally, even if it is definitely Cushing’s I wouldn’t treat with Vetoryl.

Thank you so much for your time.

Dr. Steve's Advice - there's nothing wrong with adding the Four Marvels and seeing if it produces some improvements in symptoms.

Hopefully you've seen the Cessorex and Halscion help. If they haven't, and the Four Marvels does, then your dog is prone to Damp Heat. In that instance, it may help with the skin problems, too.

To be sure of an effect, use the dose for your dog's weight at https://nphc.ca/using/dosage Give that amount twice daily.



Case 36
 
Question: Help for 8 year old miniature poodle with Cushings and diabetes. Bella’s Cushings is under control with 5 mg Vetoryl daily. Giving Vestulin injections twice a day ( 12 hrs apart )She was diagnosed with diabetes on October 20, 2022. She Is currently hospitalized because she will not eat and was vomiting, and Ketones high. Problem is two fold. Diet and correct dose of insulin. We are monitoring her BG using the Libre Free Style meter. She has lost weight (10.5 lbs)...down from 14. Very lethargic. Any advice will be appreciated. Thank you!!!

Dr. Steve's Advice - Cushing's is a reversible condition in most dogs once a real food diet is fed instead of kibbles or canned foods. The same real food meat-and-vegetable diet also greatly enhances insulin sensitivity, even in diabetic dogs, allowing required insulin doses to stabilize or even be reduced. That's probably the single most important thing you could do for your dog right now - a real food diet.

As for herbs to support her, for sure there are some, but it would be great if she is in that delicate a state for you to take her to a holistic veterinarian in your area, once she gets out of the hospital. Meanwhile, to get her to eat in the hospital, I'd suggest taking her some cooked chicken or turkey. Sometimes animals love it that much more if it's smoked.



Case 37

Question: Hi Dr. Steve!  Thank you for all you do to help all our furbabies.

Our 15 year old Boston Terrier has many symptoms of Cushings. Blood work came back good and had the Low Dose Dex test. Results indicated NO Cushings so vet thinks maybe in early stages Cushings . Worse issue he has right now is the increased thirst and urination. What would you recommend to mainly address the increased thirst and excessive urination issue? Thank You!!

Dr. Steve's Advice - the first thing I do in Cushing's is change the diet to a real food diet away from canned or kibble. Often that starts the symptoms improving. I then add Four Marvels, which you can obtain from Kan Essentials often online, to expedite the improvements.


Case 38

Question: Thank you for the add. My girl is six and a half. She was diagnosed with Cushing's in June. We started out on 20 mg per day. Once in the morning. She weighs 23 lb. Her symptoms were controlled until October when they all came back. Excessive thirst
 
peeing hunger pot belly not wanting to play or anything. Her vetoryl was increased by 5 mg for another month with no improvement. Spoke to the vet, increased another five and split dose so she's getting 15a.m. and 15 p.m. there hasn't been any improvement since October. She is scheduled for an ACTH test on January 10th and I have an appointment with holistic vet the end of February. Listened to your web cast and I am now making homemade low glycemic meals and ordered Four Marvels. She acts miserable. Glucose was ok. Triglycerides are high. She also has recurring clostridium treated with metronidazole. IMS recommended hydrolized food because of diarrhea but it really hasn't helped so I'm cooking ground turkey, brown rice, kidney beans, green beans. Thank you for your time

Dr. Steve's Advice - if Four Marvels hasn't helped, then I would try Harmonize the Qi (Minor Bupleurum) next. It is made by Kan Essentials and is probably able to be found where you found the Four Marvels. It may do a better job of controlling her diarrhea and shrinking her adrenal tumor.
An even better product might be Halscion from Gold Standard Herbs. It's efficacy in anxiety is its ability to control adrenal output. It contains Minor Bupleurum, so you might get the same benefits there, but has additional herbs in it that can control diarrhea.

If your holistic vet identifies active Gall Bladder points, one of these products should work for sure

Hope that helps!



Case 39

Question: Hi Dr.Steve,

My vet thinks my 9yr old boxer mix may have Cushings (blood test is scheduled for Wed) I have started giving her milk thistle, Prana adrenal balance and Prana lignans and melatonin blend. I make her chicken which is added to her Nulo dry food. She is not drinking as much water and seems to be doing well but now she has diarrhea—please help

Dr. Steve's Advice - I find kibble is actually the cause of most Cushing's in dogs. Since you're feeding chicken already, why not give her a break from the kibble and just feed something bland and simple to digest along with the chicken for a day or two until the diarrhea settles. Even white rice is okay for that purpose for a day or two only.
Note that despite their popularity, I don't agree that the Prana adrenal product makes sense for most Cushing's dogs, and would expect some to 'run hotter' such as by developing colitis. If the diarrhea is colitis, you can address that with Four Marvels from Kan Essentials, which treats Cushing's as well in most dogs, often eliminating the need (once a fresh food diet is in place) for any other treatment. If you decide to try the Four Marvels and don't have a holistic vet to source it from, you can obtain it from Aleksandra Topic.
 
Hope that helps!



Case 40

Question: I have an 8 year old that was recently diagnosed with Cushings and has some lumbar issues. Also have an older 11 year old that I am giving an adequan injection to monthly for a mild hip issue. What supplements would you recommend? I am seeing two, voltrex and lumbrex.

Dr. Steve's Advice - for Cushings, A switch to a real food diet and the incorporation of a herbal formula called Four Marvels Combination by Kan Essentials (often sold on Amazon in the US) will reverse the disease in most dogs.
Hip issues respond very consistently to Voltrex . I would try that out for your other dog Hope that helps!
